\chapter*{}%
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Abstract}%

\begin{center}
\begin{large}
\textbf{Optimization of atomic and molecular targets \\ in collisional processes}
\end{large}
\end{center}

\vspace{1cm}
In this Thesis, the inelastic collisional processes arising from the 
interaction of ions and electrons with atomic and molecular targets are 
studied. The systems examined throughout this research work are of 
interest in several fields, from astrophysical plasma diagnostics, 
characterization and improvement of material design, to the evaluation 
of damage caused by ions and radiation. In examining collisional 
problems, it is of great importance to represent the atomic or 
molecular targets accurately. Although the theoretical grounds that 
allow one to determine the dynamics of such systems are given by the 
solutions of the corresponding Schrödinger equation, it is well known 
that the exact solution for complex systems cannot be obtained. 
Therefore, we have developed several techniques, each design to be 
implemented to solve a particular collisional problem. These procedures 
include a “depurated inversion method”(DIM) to obtain effective atomic 
and molecular potentials, a Bayesian method to optimize the atomic 
structure of the target in electron impact calculations, the 
implementation of relativistic methods to compute the stopping power in 
heavy elements, and a stoichiometric model to attain the ionization of 
biological molecules. All these methods have been developed from first 
principles, and they are originally implemented in this investigation.

\vspace{1cm}
\noindent
Key words: 
Atoms, 
Molecules, 
Target optimization, 
Collisional processes

